---
layout: post
title:  Dreaming in Code
bookreview: true
---

[Dreaming In Code][ref_link] is a book written by [Scott Rosenberg][author]
about a bold open source software project that aimed to change the way we
organize personal information — Chandler. It was started and funded by Mitch
Kapor, Lotus 1-2-3 designer, former Chair of the Mozilla Foundation and
co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation. In this post I will try to
give my humble review of this book and provide some interesting notes.

<!-- more start -->

Even though the book is about a software project it’s not very technical or
aimed at a particular new buzz technology or programming language. The book is
about the project, the process of development and in the end, about the people
that worked on the project itself. Speaking of that you will notice that
Chandler attracted people that worked on interesting software projects. Even
though some very great minds were involved in the project and Kapor made sure
that the workplace is as enjoyable as possible it failed to fulfill the
expectations of becoming a new, better way of handling personal information.

The author itself is not involved in the development process in any way which
gives him a particulary interesting view point of every situation. He joins the
meetings to collect notes but also interviews the individuals working on the
project. Sometimes the author winds up talking about some particular problem in
software development which results in a healthy combination of both technical
and non-technical content.

Whether you're a software developer or manager the author will keep you
interested. My only regret is that the book ended too soon. I guess that
Rosenberg initialy had the intentions on following the project through his
whole life cycle but had his doubts when the original goals started to seem
further and further away. The author then probably tried to save his book from
having the same fate as Chandler itself.

The book is very easy to follow and a great read in my opinion. You will also
come across some interesting references that I recommend going through.

<!-- more end -->

 [ref_link]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B002RAR25C/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=randomshoutin-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B002RAR25C
 [author]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scott_Rosenberg_(journalist)
